Add fixing data guide (#178)
ESMValGroup/ESMValCore: doc/esmvalcore/fixing_data.rst

Typical examples of such errors are missing or wrong attributes (e.g.
attribute ''units'' says 1e-9 but data are actually in 1e-6), missing or
mislabeled coordinates (e.g. ''lev'' instead of ''plev'' or missing
coordinate bounds like ''lat_bnds'') or problems with the actual data
(e.g. cloud liquid water only instead of sum of liquid + ice as specified by the CMIP data request).

The ESMValTool can apply on the fly fixes to data sets that have
known errors that can be fixed automatically.

Fix structure
=============

Fixes are Python classes stored in ``esmvaltool/cmor/_fixes/[PROJECT]/[DATASET].py``
that derive from :class:`esmvalcore.cmor._fixes.fix.Fix` and
are named after the short name of the variable they fix. You can use the name
``AllVars`` if you want the fix to be applied to the whole dataset

.. warning::
    Be careful to replace any ``-`` with ``_`` in your dataset name.
    We need this replacement to have proper python module names.

The fixes are automatically loaded and applied when the dataset is preprocessed.

Fixing a dataset
================

To illustrate the process of creating a fix we are going to construct a new

> one from scratch for a fictional dataset. We need to fix a CMIP7 model

Reviewer: CMIP7 model? Did you just come up with the name to show that it is fictional? I found that a little confusing. I think it should be fine to call it "CMIP6 model called PERFECT-MODEL" and everybody should know that this is fictional...

Reviewer 2: Do not underestimate modellers' skills... :sunglasses:

Author: I am tempted to change it to CMIP4, for extra confusion

I think I will change it to CMIPX, so nobody can take it for a real CMIP.

called PERFECT-MODEL that is reporting a missing latitude coordinate for
variable tas.

Check the output
----------------

Next to the error message, you should see some info about the iris cube: size,
coordinates. In our example it looks like this:

.. code-block:: python

   cube output with latitude called altitude

So now the mistake is clear: the latitude coordinate is badly named and the
fix should just rename it.

Create the fix
--------------

We start by creating the module file. In our example the path will be

> ``esmvaltool/cmor/_fixes/CMIP7/PERFECT_MODEL.py``. If it already exists

Reviewer: Do you want to store it really in this path? If yes, I understand that you want to use CMIP7 to make sure it does not get confused with anything CMIP6 related. As soon as we get CMIP7 data, though, we would have the same problem.

.. fixing_data:

*************
Dataset fixes
*************

Some (model) datasets contain (known) errors that would normally prevent them

> from being processed correctly with the ESMValTool. The errors can be in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from being processed correctly by the ESMValTool. The errors can be in
```

> the metadata describing the dataset and / or in the actual data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the metadata describing the dataset and/or in the actual data.
```

Typical examples of such errors are missing or wrong attributes (e.g.
attribute ''units'' says 1e-9 but data are actually in 1e-6), missing or
mislabeled coordinates (e.g. ''lev'' instead of ''plev'' or missing

> variable ''lat_bnds'') or problems with the actual data (e.g. the time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
coordinate bounds like ''lat_bnds'') or problems with the actual data (e.g. the time
```

> coordinate variable or cloud liquid water only instead of sum of

Reviewer 2: I would be more specific about the time coordinate variable problem.

> liquid + ice as specified).

Reviewer 2: as specific... by?

> The ESMValTool can automatically apply on the fly fixes to data sets that have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ESMValTool can apply on the fly fixes to data sets that have
```

> known errors that can be fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
known errors that can be fixed automatically.
```

Fix structure
=============

> Fixes are clases stored in ``esmvaltool/cmor/_fixes/[PROJECT]/[DATASET].py``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fixes are Python classes stored in ``esmvaltool/cmor/_fixes/[PROJECT]/[DATASET].py``
```

that derive from :class:`esmvalcore.cmor._fixes.fix.Fix` and

> named after the short name of the variable they fix. You can use the name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are named after the short name of the variable they fix. You can use the name
```

``AllVars`` if you want the fix to be applied to the whole dataset

.. warning::
    Be careful to replace any ``-`` with ``_`` in your dataset name.

>     We need this replacement to have proper python module names

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    We need this replacement to have proper python module names.
```

> They are automatically loaded and applied when the dataset is preprocessed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fixes are automatically loaded and applied when the dataset is preprocessed.
```

Fixing a dataset
================

To illustrate the process of creating a fix we are going to construct a new
one from scratch for a fictional dataset. We need to fix a CMIP7 model
called PERFECT-MODEL that is reporting a missing latitude coordinate for
variable tas.

Check the output
----------------

Next to the error message, you should see some info about the iris cube: size,
coordinates. In our example it looks like this:

.. code-block:: python

   cube output with latitude called altitude

So now the mistake is clear: the latitude coordinate is badly named and the

> fix should just rename it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fix should just rename it.
```

Create the fix
--------------

We start by creating the module file. In our example the path will be
``esmvaltool/cmor/_fixes/CMIP7/PERFECT_MODEL.py``. If it already exists
just add the class to the file, there is no limit in the number of fixes

> we can have in any given file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we can have in any given file.
```

Then we have to create the class for the fix deriving from
:class:`esmvalcore.cmor._fixes.Fix`

.. code-block:: python

    """Fixes for PERFECT-MODEL."""
    from esmvalcore.cmor.fix import Fix

    class tas(Fix):
         """Fixes for tas variable.""""

> And now we must choose the method to use between the ones offered by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next we must choose the method to use between the ones offered by the
```

Fix class:

- ``fix_file`` : should be used only to fix errors that prevent data loading.

>   As a rule of thumb, you should only use it you are not even

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  As a rule of thumb, you should only use it if the execution halts before
```

>   reaching the checks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  reaching the checks.
```

- ``fix_metadata`` : you want to change something in the cube that is not

>   the data.

Reviewer 2: Give example.

- ``fix_data``: you need to fix the data. Beware: coordinates data values are

>   part of the metadata

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  part of the metadata.
```

In our case we need to rename the coordinate ``altitude`` to ``latitude``,

> so we will implement the ``fix_metadata`` method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so we will implement the ``fix_metadata`` method:
```

.. code-block:: python

    """Fixes for PERFECT-MODEL."""
    from esmvalcore.cmor.fix import Fix

    class tas(Fix):
        """Fixes for tas variable.""""

        def fix_metadata(self, cubes):
            """
            Fix metadata for tas.

            Fix the name of the latitude coordinate, which is called altitude
            in the original file.
            """"
            # Sometimes Iris will interpret the data as multiple cubes.
            # Good CMOR datasets will only show one but we support the
            # multiple cubes case to be able to fix the errors that are
            # leading to that extra cubes.
            # In our case this means that we can safely assume that the
            # tas cube is the first one
            tas_cube = cubes[0]
            latitude = tas_cube.coord('altitude')

            # Fix the names. Latitude values, units and
            latitude.short_name = 'lat'
            latitude.standard_name = 'latitude'
            latitude.long_name = 'latitude'

> And that's all. The next time you run ESMValTool you will find that the error

Reviewer 2: Sound a bit too informal, I would replace with: `This will fix the error and next time..."

is fixed on the fly and, hopefully, your recipe will run free of errors.

Sometimes other errors can appear after you fix the first one because they were
hidden by it. In our case,  the latitude coordinate could have bad units or

> values outside the valid range for example. Just extend your fix to fix those

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
values outside the valid range for example. Just extend your fix to address those
```

> errors and keep going

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
errors.
```

Finishing
---------

Chances are that you are not the only one that wants to use that dataset and

> variable. Other users will be very grateful to have your fixes available as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
variable. Other users could take advantage of your fixes as
```

soon as possible. Please, create a separated pull request for the fix and
submit it.

It will also be very helpful if you just scan a couple of other variables from
the same dataset and check if they share this error. In case that you find that
it is a general one, you can change the fix name to ``AllVars`` so it gets

> executed for the full dataset. If you find that this is shared only by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
executed for all variables in the dataset. If you find that this is shared only by
```

from the one you just created:

.. code-block:: python

    """Fixes for PERFECT-MODEL."""
    from esmvalcore.cmor.fix import Fix

    class tas(Fix):
        """Fixes for tas variable.""""

        def fix_metadata(self, cubes):
            """
            Fix metadata for tas.

            Fix the name of the latitude coordinate, which is called altitude
            in the original file.
            """"
            # Sometimes Iris will interpret the data as multiple cubes.
            # Good CMOR datasets will only show one but we support the
            # multiple cubes case to be able to fix the errors that are
            # leading to that extra cubes.
            # In our case this means that we can safely assume that the
            # tas cube is the first one
            tas_cube = cubes[0]
            latitude = tas_cube.coord('altitude')

            # Fix the names. Latitude values, units and
            latitude.short_name = 'lat'
            latitude.standard_name = 'latitude'
            latitude.long_name = 'latitude'

    class ps(tas):
        """Fixes for ps variable."""

Common errors
=============

> Our example covered one of the most common cases: variables / coordinates that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above example covers one of the most common cases: variables / coordinates that
```

have names that do not match the expected. But there are some others that use

> to appear frequently. This section will describe them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to appear frequently. This section will describe the most common cases.
```

Bad units declared
------------------

> Is quite common that a variable declares to be using some units but the data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is quite common that a variable declares to be using some units but the data
```

> is stored in another. This can be solved ovwerwriting the units attribute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is stored in another. This can be solved by overwriting the units attribute
```

> with the real data units.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the actual data units.
```

.. code-block:: python

    ...
        def fix_metadata(self, cubes):
            ...
            cube.units = 'real_units'
            ...

Detecting this error can be tricky if the units are similar enough. It also
has a good chance of going undetected until you notice strange results in

> your diagnostic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
your diagnostic.
```

Coordinates missing
-------------------

Another common error is to have missing coordinates. Usually it just means

> that the file does not follow the CF-conventions and Iris can not interpret it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that the file does not follow the CF-conventions and Iris can therefore not interpret it.
```

If this is the case, you should see a warning from the ESMValTool about

> discarding somecubes in the fix metadata step. Just before that warning you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
discarding some cubes in the fix metadata step. Just before that warning you
```
(?)
